Jeff and MaryJo -- Here’s some markers for the interactive.  Idea stage. Pick and choose.

Mississippi River near LaCrosse where USGS found the first zebra mussel in Minnesota.

Lake Pepin, where the zebras moved next. Lake Pepin was an early spreader.

Ossiwinimikee Lake (sp), first inland Minnesota lake (unattached to the river) to be infected.

Mille Lacs,  an early host for zebras and the focus of much study. Mille Lacs zebras, contrary to intuition, has not been a spreader according to DNA  testing

Winnibigoshish, northern iconic walleye factory just infected last summer. Ppl there fear the same fate as the mille lacs fishery.

Leech Lake, the biggest lake in Cass County and a cornerstone of northern Minnesota’s summer lakes traffic, was detected to have veligers last summer in two different parts of the lake. The DNR just completed major and successful fisheries work to revive the walleye population in Leech, now people will sit back and see if an infestation tips that in another direction.  

Rose Lake (and I may have the name of this lake wrong, i’ll check later) .  The one lake in Minnesota where we know for sure how it was infected by zebras: a north dakota lake service provider set a dock in the lake that was full of the mussels. He was criminally prosecuted and officials swooped in to kill the zebras. We don’t know if it worked yet.

Gull Lake and other Crow Wing County lakes -- an example of a cluster of lakes infested with the same mutation of zebra mussel, proving how overland boat hauling from lake to lake is the main pathway.  There are 7 (?)  of these clusters identified so far by DNA testing.

Christmas Lake -- An example of several futile attempts by the DNR to eradicate zebra mussels in a lake.  They pounded Christmas with toxins and it killed the mussels near a boat ramp where they were seemingly contained. But the mussels reappeared in the lake and it’s beyond fixable.

Lake Minnetonka:  Billions of zebra mussels infect this most popular lake and USGS scientists collect their testing samples from Robinson Bay to do national research.

Montana -- one of the new hotspots for zebra mussels. Officials there are freaked out that the mussels will interfere with hydropower installations in big reservoirs.  It’s actually keeping zebra mussel research alive because of industry’s needs.

Lake St. Clair (?)  I think this is the water body adjoining lake erie where zebra mussels were first detected in the U.S.

Chicago -- an industrial river pathway gave zebra mussels entre’ to the rest of the U.S.

Vermilion Lake --  an example of low-calcium lakes in northeast minnesota that aren’t suitable for zebras. They have focused their AIS efforts on other species.

St. Croix River -- wild, scenic and pristine, but zebras are threatening to collapse the beautiful assortment of native mussels in this river.

Hubbard County -- one of the first minnesota counties to fight AIS on its own.  As a result, Hubbard County is zebra mussel free